---
title: "An error in ML that caused me much grief"
layout: post
date: 2016-10-18 22:29:33 EDT
---

I am in a Programming Languages class (COMP 105 at Tufts, if you're curious).
We are in the middle of a problemset to learn ML. In that problemset, we had
to write several functions that deal with trees:

```sml
datatype 'a tree = LEAF
                 | NODE of 'a tree * 'a * 'a tree 
```

One of those functions was `treeFoldr`. `treeFoldr` has the following type:

```sml
('a * 'b -> 'b) -> 'b -> 'a tree -> 'b
```

So I naturally implemented it like:

```sml
fun treeFoldr f acc LEAF = ...
  | treeFoldr f acc NODE(left, d, right) = ...
```

When compiled, though, I got two errors I did not understand. First off was
`stdIn:173.5-180.10 Error: clauses don't all have same number of patterns`.
But after close inspection... wait, they totally do. That's a lie! Each took a
function, an accumulator (initial value), and a `'a tree`! So this flummoxed
me. I decided to look at the next error.

`stdIn:174.21-174.25 Error: data constructor NODE used without argument in
pattern`. Super helpful, right? Because to me it looked like `NODE` had three
arguments. But SML/NJ, MosML, and MLton all said it did not.

And of course, neither of these was super Google-able. None of the search
results that came up seemed relevant.

After much waffling around, it occurred to me that *that argument needs
parentheses!* SML thought that I was giving `treeFoldr` four arguments -- a
function, an accumulator, a poorly-formed `'a tree` constructor, and a tuple.

So I fixed it by adding parentheses. The final result looks like this:

```sml
fun treeFoldr f acc LEAF = ...
  | treeFoldr f acc (NODE(left, d, right)) = ...
```

and fixes both errors.

Hopefully this post turns up in search results and helps people in the future.
