---
title: Removing runtime checks with dataflow graphs
layout: post
date: 2021-11-30 00:00:00 PT
---

Python is a programming language with a primary implementation called
[CPython](https://github.com/python/cpython/). CPython is implemented as a
stack-based bytecode virtual machine[^gross]. Among these bytecode instructions
are a set of bytecode operations for accessing the local variables in a
function:

* `LOAD_FAST`, for fetching a local by index
* `STORE_FAST`, for setting a local by index
* `DELETE_FAST`, for deleting a local by index

[^gross]: This might change soon with if Sam Gross's GIL-removal patch series
    lands. Part of the patch series includes a change from the decades-old
    stack machine to a register machine to "sweeten the deal" performance-wise.

For example, the following Python function:

```python
def foo():
  a = 123
  return a
```

might be compiled to the following bytecode:

```
0 LOAD_CONST               1 (123)
2 STORE_FAST               0 (a)

4 LOAD_FAST                0 (a)
6 RETURN_VALUE
```

Which, if you read the Python code in a straight line and ignore any compiler
optimizations you might be tempted to apply, makes sense! The first line,
`a = 123`, compiles to a `LOAD_CONST`/`STORE_FAST` combo, and the second line,
`return a`, compiles to a `LOAD_FAST`/`RETURN_VALUE` combo.

Let's take a look at how `LOAD_FAST` [is implemented][loadfast] in the core
interpreter loop of CPython:

[loadfast]: https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/d2b55b07d2b503dcd3b5c0e2753efa835cff8e8f/Python/ceval.c#L1777-L1785

```c
TARGET(LOAD_FAST) {
  PyObject *value = GETLOCAL(oparg);
  if (value == NULL) {
      goto unbound_local_error;
  }
  Py_INCREF(value);
  PUSH(value);
  DISPATCH();
}
```

Part of this opcode implementation includes a check to see if the local
variable is bound. Why, though? Why can't it just see that `a` is defined
*right there*? Why must we do all of this extra work?

I can answer the *why*: unlike languages like C, the following is considered a
valid Python program:

```python
def foo():
  if some_condition:
    a = 123
  return a
```

If `some_condition` is falsey and `a` never ends up getting defined, the
`return a` must raise `UnboundLocalError`.

As to the *wherefore*: I cannot say. This is just How Python Is. But I can show
you how to get rid of this extra check by using some Cool Graphs and Compiler
Fun.

### Cool Graphs

Unfortunately, while CPython's compiler has some helpful internal
representations of the code, the only code representation that still lives at
run-time is the bytecode. I say "unfortunately" because this stack-based
bytecode format is not convenient for making inferences about the code.

### Compiler Fun
