---
title: A catalog of ways to generate SSA
---

Static Single Assignment is a program representation where each "variable"
(though this term can be misleading) is assigned exactly once. Mostly the
variables aren't variables at all, but instead names for values---for
expressions. I'm making this page to catalog the papers I have found
interesting and leave a couple of comments on them.

## A brief bit of background

It comes from the 1980s. Wikipedia claims the first paper about it (though not
by the name SSA) was [Code
Motion of Control Structures in High Level
Languages](/assets/img/zadeck-code-motion.pdf) (PDF), which I had not seen
before today. There was also [Global Value Numbers and Redundant
Computations](/assets/img/zadeck-gvn.pdf) (PDF), which I had also not seen
before today.

## Let's generate some variables

Finally, in 1991, the same group produced the first SSA paper I was already
familiar with: [The Cytron Paper](/assets/img/cytron-ssa.pdf) (PDF). This
approach requires computing dominance frontiers for an existing control-flow
graph, which may or may not be useful or applicable in your situation. If you
have bytecode, this might be workable, but you'll need to ["discover" the basic
blocks](/blog/discovering-basic-blocks/) hiding within. It's also a notable
paper because it produces the minimal amount of phi functions.

In 1994, Brandis and Mössenböck write [Single-Pass Generation of Static
Single-Assignment Form for Structured
Languages](/assets/img/brandis-single-pass.pdf) (PDF). This is a neat approach
because it shows that you don't need to do Fancy Algorithms or Fancy Data
Structures to get SSA---you can build it as soon as during parsing, something I
have taken to doing recently. It turns out that if you don't have `goto`,
things get easier for the compiler developer.

In 1995, Richard Kelsey writes about how CPS and SSA are similar in [A
Correspondence between Continuation Passing Style and Static Single Assignment
Form](/assets/img/kelsey-ssa-cps.pdf) (PDF). Part of the paper involves
converting CPS to SSA (and the reverse, too).

In 1998, Appel (of functional language fame) describes briefly a correspondence
between functional languages and SSA in [SSA is Functional
Programming](/assets/img/appel-basic-block-arguments.pdf) (PDF). I think this
is the first paper that introduced a notion of "basic block arguments" (instead
of phi functions). He also suggests a "really crude" algorithm for generating
SSA that places phi nodes all over the place for every variable.

In 2000, Aycock and Horspool publish [Simple Generation of Static
Single-Assignment Form](/assets/img/aycock-horspool-ssa.pdf) (PDF). It starts
from Appel's approach and then iteratively deletes phi nodes that don't need to
exist. They find that for reducible control-flow graphs (the common case for
most compilers, I think), their approach also produces minimal SSA.

In 2009, Michael Bebenita writes [Constructing SSA the Easy
Way](/assets/img/bebenita-ssa.pdf) (PDF) which is "essentially a rehashing of
Aycock's SSA construction algorithm but using forwarding pointers instead". I
only found it the other day. It's fantastic and I wish more people knew about
it. It uses one of my favorite data structures, union-find, though for some
reason it does not mention it by name.

In 2013, my former coworker Matthias Braun and his labmates write [Simple and
Efficient Construction of Static Single Assignment
Form](/assets/img/braun13cc.pdf) (PDF), which describes converting to SSA from
an AST and building the CFG on the fly. It's fairly popular because it is
simpler than the Cytron paper. I find the phase transitions in the blocks
(filled/sealed/...) a little tricky to keep straight though.

In 2023, Matthieu Lemerre writes [SSA Translation Is an Abstract
Interpretation](/assets/img/lemerre-ssa.pdf) (PDF), which I would love to
understand one day.

## Other papers

I will eventually add some papers on extensions to SSA, analyses on SSA,
converting out of SSA (including register allocation). Just not this evening.

I am also probably missing or forgetting some big hit papers for converting
into SSA, so please drop me a line if you have favorites.

## Other resources

The [SSA book](/assets/img/ssa-book.pdf) (PDF; draft) is a huge tour de force
of SSA-based compiler design. That is even the new name of the book, which has
since been [published in
print](https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-3-030-80515-9). It's on my
shelf.
