---
title: "Travel notes: PLDI Seoul"
layout: post
---

I went to PLDI in Seoul, South Korea. I had a nice time. Here are some
unstructured thoughts.

It was great to see old familiar faces, meet new people, and unexpected (though
not unwelcome) to have multiple people approach and say they read my blog.
Hello, dear readers!

Vegetarian food is tricky, but if you look for a "temple meal" or restaurants
specifically called out as vegetarian friendly (or even full vegan), you will
be okay. A lot of food that otherwise looks vegetarian probably contains fish
products. If you are okay with a bit of a grey area, the Myeong-dong night
market has a good fried potato cheese stick thing and a cream cheese garlic
bread.

Go to a chicken and beer place with friends. We spent a good deal of time
looking for a cute bar vibe (and did find one secret bar!) but the best bang
for buck is definitely fries and 4000 Won Cass beer.

I had a nice time walking the Cheonggyecheon river (creek?). It's separated
from traffic, has fish and birds, and many people enjoy sitting alongside it.
Don't go on rainy day because it is also where rainwater flows to, but on an
overcast or sunny day it's great.

Not many people online suggest the city wall walk---in fact, I did not see it
mentioned on any website I looked at---but I stumbled across it coming out of
the Cheonggyecheon walk and in search of a 7-Eleven. It's a nice 15 mile
circular tour of old Seoul. I didn't do the whole thing because it was already
so late in the day but I will next time. Bring a cold beverage (corn silk tea
is nice). It's hilly.

On the city wall walk by Naksan there is a cute cafe called *cogito, ergo sum*.
I had ice cream there and looked out over the city. It's a lovely place to sit
and cool off. The neighbors have a cat that goes adventuring around.

After dinner, I stumbled across yet another thing that I had somehow not seen
mentioned anywhere: Jongno! I accidentally wandered into the Ikseon-dong Hanok
village at night, where there are restaurants and shops in a reconstructed
stone-and-timber village.

As I departed for the train, I also wandered into the night market on
Donhwamun-ro 11-gil, which was packed and also looked excellent. Pity I had
already eaten... this looked like *the* place to be.

Until next time, South Korea!
